Right, this is Catherine McShane interviewing for the SWCCR Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary
Project and I'm here with Ray Thoburn in Trowbridge in Cardiff and it is the 15th of October
2014.
Ray, could you spell your name for me?
R-A-Y T-H-O-B-U-R-N
Fab, thanks. So what's your involvement been with Cardiff Carnival?
I tend to make the bigger puppets, the large, sometimes up to 11 foot puppets that you see
going around the streets.
When you say you make those, is that at the carnival camp or...?
Most of the big stuff, the actual joining of the aluminium is done down at the carnival
camp. But we make a lot of stuff at home in preparation for it, if it's needed, depending
on what we're doing.
What sort of things do you make then?
I made a knight, I made Queen Elizabeth I, made a giant mermaid, made a lot of wings
and a lot of shoulder joints for different puppets and found new ways of making the wings
and the shoulder joints as well. Because the way they were being made was a little bit
difficult to use.
Is it that something you've got a background in then or is it something you've learnt there?
I've always looked for the easiest way to do things. I've got a background in engineering
and when you're an engineer you look for the easiest way to do things at the time with
whatever you happen to have to hand.
So what's been the favourite thing that you've made?
Oh, the favourite thing. I don't know, I've enjoyed them all. I did enjoy making Queen
Elizabeth I because, well, it was the first major puppet that I got to pilot. I hadn't
really done much of the performance side of it before I made her. I enjoyed the piloting
side of that one. It was a lot of fun.
So how did the crowd react to your puppetry?
I mean a lot of little girls screamed, which is quite a laugh really. And one gentleman
sticks out of your mind, he was clearly a disabled gentleman and he looked all forlorn
by himself. So I left the parade and went and teased him for a couple of minutes and
when I left he was laughing so I thought that'll do. That's him cheered up for the day.
Oh, fab.
I enjoy that side of interaction with the crowd. Just sneaking up on young children
with a huge pair of hands stretched out in front of you. When they look up and see what's
coming they do scream.
So making children cry then?
Yeah, basically making children cry. It's my life's dream.
So how many have you done?
I don't know. I've not really kept a count. I've done a few over the years but I've made
stuff. Before Carnival it was quite big and quite meaty. I've always had a handkerchief
to put things together and just do things. It hasn't always been practical, it hasn't
always been functional but I've always made things and did things by hand. It's just the
way I've been brought up.
I hear that you've helped quite a few other people.
Yeah, but I don't enjoy that part of it at all. I get no thanks.
Oh really?
Not whatsoever. I don't think I bother next year. I'll leave them to rot.
So what do you enjoy most about it, about Carnival?
Well, to be honest, when I first went down, when I first walked in through the door, I
felt a little bit out of place. But there was a really nice girl there called Caroline
who she came straight over to us as new faces and she really made us feel welcome. She was
a star she was that year and we're still friends now. She proved herself to be a star, a real
team player that year and she really welcomed us on board. Which was something that some
of the others didn't really bother doing the first year. We were welcomed the second year
by. There was returning friends. But the first year, Caroline really came across and really
made us feel welcome. I was grateful for that, for that input. Without that I might not bother
for a second year.
And is it something you're likely to continue with?
Oh, I can't continue going down. Yeah, we've been set on the right foot. There's a lot
of lovely people down there that we've gotten to know over the years. It would be a shame
if we didn't get to see them every year.
Have you got any kind of memorable moments, either kind of carnival camp or on parade?
I don't know how memorable it is really, but there was an instance where I went up to one
of the guys that was making a structure and I pointed out a weak flaw in the design. And
I more or less got told, don't be silly, it's fine. But that person, she came and admitted
that she slept on that, woke up in a cold sweat in the middle of the night and said
that bugger's right. And she went and changed it and that worked. That costume worked because
of that. And I got thanked for that one as well. In a kind of backhanded sort of way.
Well, no one likes being told they're wrong, do they?
Everything else was perfect on it. It was just that one little part I could see it wasn't
going to feel. I could see it wouldn't work. But she put so much effort into everything
else that that little bit was just something she'd missed. One little tiny detail. But
there we are. She's seen it now.
There we go. And friends you've made, you mentioned friends that you've made along the
way. Yeah, yeah, we've made some lovely friends along the way. Some of us, well there's one
in particular, every year, carnival camp she comes and she actually stays here now for
the duration of the carnival camp. Then a week or two after. In fact you wonder when
she's going to leave some years. Where's she from then? Is she not from Cardiff? No, she
comes from Penzance. Oh right, so quite a distance then. Quite a distance. But yeah,
she comes up and she's the perfect house guest. We don't know if she's there half
the time. So yeah, it's always nice to see her. And is she someone else who makes big
costumes then? She makes big costumes as well, yeah. She does a really good job of it. She
makes some belters, she does. Some real belters. Another really skillful individual. Nice to
see. Nice to see the results. And, because obviously all yours are sort of very big costumes.
Is it really tiring by the end of the parade? Are you worn out? It depends. The first year
I was Queen Elizabeth because of the way that the elder shawl adjoints had been created
using various bits of steel and screws. That was a nightmare to try and get any sort of
movement out of that. Because to move one area, the boxes were all turned in different
directions and they were starting to tighten up themselves and it was becoming really difficult
to move. And we had a discussion and we decided that from then on we wouldn't use aluminium
and stuff to make the adjoints. We would just use a piece of rope and from that day forward
all our costumes would be made with rope in the adjoints and we would not have had a single
problem with any mobility anywhere. It's been a lot easier since then hasn't it? A lot easier
to use them. So are they heavy? Some of them can be but if they're designed with enough
counter balance beneath them they sit really well. If they're top heavy they will tend to topple
over so you have to bear that in mind when you're making them. Make them heavier below your
shoulders so they won't topple off or topple over. So you can dance in them then? Well some of the
ones I've made you can actually hold a dance in them. Some of the ones I've made have been really
very big indeed. But yeah you can dance and sing and chat around. It was actually Caroline again
she wanted to do a bit of jiving with Queen Elizabeth the first on the way up to the big weekend.
So me and Caroline were jiving walking up the road and I was dancing in this big costume. That was a bit of fun.
That was alright. That was a laugh. Oh great. So would you recommend being involved in Carnival to other people?
Well yes I would. Anybody who's got any sort of aspirations to perform in any shape or form should get down to Carnival.
And just give it a try. At the end of the day those people are, each and every one of them is as different as
chalk and cheese from each other. But they all come under the main head of Carnival people.
And that is just a crack of bunch of guys and girls. They're a real treat to be around. It's a pleasure knowing them.
A real pleasure. Great. Thank you very much.